Advanced
JMW Turner, one of Britains greatest painters, is to be the face of the new 20 note, following a nationwide vote.
It will be the first time an artist has appeared on a British banknote, after the governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, asked the public to nominate a deceased cultural figure they felt deserved the high honour.
Turner, renowned for his dramatic seascapes, beat off competition from 590 painters, sculptors, fashion designers, photographers, film-makers and actors put forward by 30,000 members of the public.
The list included Alfred Hitchcock, Alexander McQueen, Derek Jarman, Laura Ashley, William Morris and Vanessa Bell, which was then narrowed down by a panel of artists, critics and historians to a final choice of five.
The final five  Barbara Hepworth, Charlie Chaplin, Josiah Wedgwood, William Hogarth and Turner  were selected on the basis of their unquestioned contribution to both the visual arts and British society as a whole, as well as their enduring influence.
Fittingly, the announcement of the new banknote was made at the Turner Contemporary gallery in Margate, which stands on the former site of Mrs Booths lodging house, where Turner would always stay when he visited. The announcement was made jointly by Carney and the artist Tracey Emin, who grew up in the town.
Carney said it had been so important to get this right and have a proper process that involved the public, adding that, far from banknotes being purely a practical necessity, if done properly, they can be a piece of art in everyones pocket.
Money is memory for a country and its people, said the Bank of England governor. Banknotes of the Bank of England are a celebration of the UKs heritage, a salute to its culture, a testament to its great achievements, including those of its most notable citizens. In short, money has not just economic value, it has cultural value as well.
The fact that we will have Turner on the 20 note shows now that the British people are a nation of people who appreciate creativity and appreciate the arts, said Emin.
The note will feature Turners 1799 self-portrait, which currently hangs in Tate Britain, as well as one of his most recognizable works, The Fighting Temeraire, a tribute to the ship that played a distinguished role in Nelsons victory at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805.
Emblazoned on the note will also be a quote from the artist  light is therefore colour  as well as his signature, taken from his will, in which he bequeathed many of his works to the nation.
The new 20 note, which replaces the one featuring social philosopher and economic theorist Adam Smith, will enter circulation by 2020. This is the first time the public have been given a say over whose face appears on a British banknote.
Carney overhauled the process in 2013, following a high-profile campaign to ensure that women, apart from the Queen, remained on banknotes, after the bank decided to phase out the Elizabeth Fry 5 note.
Historical figures were first introduced onto banknotes in 1970. Turner joins Winston Churchill and Jane Austen as the significant figures who will feature on the new polymer notes  a plastic-type material that the new notes will all be made from  Churchill on the 5 and Austen on the 10 note. Following in the footsteps of Florence Nightingale and Elizabeth Fry, the Pride and Prejudice author is only the third woman to be the face of British currency.
Turner was born in 1775 in London, the son of a barber, and he entered the Royal Academy Schools at the age of 14. It was 1786, when he was sent to Margate, that his love affair with painting and drawing the north-east Kent coast began. He would return to that coast throughout his life and it was where he painted some of his most dramatic oils and watercolours, describing its skies as the loveliest in all Europe.
Turner was a particularly prolific artist, producing more than 550 oil paintings and 2,000 watercolours over his lifetime. His life was also the subject of a film, in 2014, by Mike Leigh, with Timothy Spall taking on the role of the complex artist.
Victoria Pomery, the director of Turner Contemporary, said: The decision to celebrate JMW Turner, one of the greatest technical pioneers in the history of British art, is extraordinary, not least because it has proven by a public vote that Turner is the nations favourite artist. Brilliantly, it is an official acknowledgment of the immense historical value of the visual arts to the UK.
But it is also a stark reminder that we must place increasing value on our future as a nation of creative minds. We must invest to support the next great artists and innovators.
