Intermediate 
Low-income countries will continue to be the most affected by human-induced climate change over the next century. They will experience gradual sea-level rises, stronger cyclones, warmer days and nights, more unpredictable rainfall, and larger and longer heatwaves, according to a recent report.
The last major United Nations (UN) assessment, in 2007, predicted temperature rises of 6 C or more by the end of the century. That is now thought unlikely by scientists, but average land and sea temperatures are expected to continue rising throughout this century, possibly reaching 4 C above present levels  enough to devastate crops and make life in many cities unbearably hot.
As temperatures rise and oceans warm, tropical and subtropical regions will see sharp changes in annual rainfall, says the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report, released in Stockholm and published online in September.
East Africa can expect increased short rainfalls and west Africa should expect heavier monsoons. Burma, Bangladesh and India can expect stronger cyclones; elsewhere in southern Asia, heavier summer rains are anticipated. Indonesia may receive less rainfall between July and October, but the coastal regions around the south China Sea and Gulf of Thailand can expect increased rainfall extremes when cyclones hit the land.
In the long term, rainfall patterns will change. Northern countries, such as those in Europe or North America, are expected to receive more rainfall, but many subtropical arid and semi-arid regions will likely experience less rain, said the reports authors.
They added that the monsoon season is likely to start earlier and last longer.
Scientists in developing countries and commentators have welcomed the report, which they said supported their own observations.
The IPCC says that climate change is real and happening much more strongly than before. We are already seeing the effects of climate change in Bangladesh and across south Asia. Its not news to us. Most developing countries are facing climate change now. They do not need the IPCC to tell them that the weather is changing, said Saleemul Huq, director of the International Centre for Climate Change and Development.
Scientists have also lowered their projections of sea-level rises. Depending on future greenhouse gas emissions, sea levels will rise an average of 4062 cm by 2100. Nevertheless, there will be signifi cant geographical variations; many millions of people living in the developing worlds great cities, including Lagos and Calcutta, are threatened.
Weather disasters are also more likely in a warmer world, the report suggests. Although the global frequency of tropical cyclones is expected to decrease or remain unchanged, they may become more intense, with stronger winds and heavier rainfall.
Life in many developing-country cities could become unbearable, especially as urban temperatures are already far above those in surrounding countryside. Much higher temperatures could reduce the length of the growing period in some parts of Africa by up to 20%, the report said.
The charity Oxfam predicted that world hunger would worsen because climate changes inevitably hurt crop production and reduce incomes. They said the number of people at risk of hunger might rise by 10% to 20% by 2050.
The changing climate is already jeopardizing gains in the fi ght against hunger, and it looks like it will get worse, said Oxfam. A hot world is a hungry world.

