Intermediate 
Prince Harry has flown out of Afghanistan at the end of a four-month tour. During his time there he admitted killing insurgents while flying his Apache helicopter. He spoke about the frustrations of being a royal who wishes for a life out of the spotlight.
He also told of his disdain for and distrust of some sections of the media and described how his father constantly reminded him to behave more like a member of the royal family.
A commander of the armys most sophisticated attack helicopter, the prince said he had shot at the Taliban during operations to support ground troops and rescue injured Afghan and NATO personnel. He said he was only doing his job.
In a series of interviews during his time based at Camp Bastion in Helmand Province, he hinted at the difficulty of reconciling the different roles in his life. The prince, known as Captain Wales in the army, explained his three mes. One in the army, one socially in my own private time and one with the family.
He admitted he sometimes let himself down with his laddish behaviour, which he said was probably because he is too much army and not enough prince, but he said he was entitled to privacy, too.
In another interview, he criticized the media, especially the Sun, the Daily Mail and the Daily Telegraph, three of the royal familys strongest supporters. He said he was particularly annoyed by articles comparing his role as an Apache co-pilot gunner to Spitfire crews during the second world war. No, its not like that at all, he said.
The prince said his suspicion of the media came from the treatment of his family when I was very small, but that he couldnt stop reading the stories written about him. Of course I read them, the prince said. If theres a story and somethings been written about me, I want to know whats being said. But all it does is just upset me and anger me that people can get away with writing the stuff they do. Not just about me, but about everything and everybody. My father always says, Dont read it. Everyone says, Dont read it, because its always rubbish.
Four years ago, the prince had to be taken out of Afghanistan during his first tour after a media silence was broken by mistake by an Australian magazine. This time, the Ministry of Defence chose to publicize his deployment on the understanding that newspapers and broadcasters would not give a running commentary on his life out there to allow him to do his job. Two-man crews from the BBC, Sky and ITN were sent once each to report on his visit.
When he was asked whether he felt more comfortable being Captain Wales than Prince Harry, his reply was one of the most revealing he has given about his relationship with Prince Charles. Definitely. Ive always been like that. My fathers always trying to remind me about who I am and stuff like that. But its very easy to forget about who I am when I am in the army. Everyones wearing the same uniform and doing the same kind of thing. I get on well with the lads and I enjoy my job. It really is as simple as that.
Shortly before he went to Afghanistan, the prince was photographed naked in Las Vegas during a private party. Harry said he had let himself down, but also blamed the media. I probably let myself down, I let my family down, I let other people down. But, at the end of the day, I was in a private area and there should be a certain amount of privacy that one should expect.
When he was asked where he and his brothers fascination with helicopters came from, he said, Probably the fact that you can only fit a certain number of people in a helicopter, therefore no one can follow us, like you guys.


