Intermediate 
The last time she went on stage, the mobile phone was having its first trials. Thirty-five years later, as she performs once again, singer Kate Bush is faced with a different world.
While most concerts are now aglow with phones and tablets, Bush does not want her fans watching her shows through a screen.
Before her highly anticipated series of concerts at the Hammersmith Apollo in London, Bush released a statement asking her fans to put down their mobile phones at her gigs.
Bush wrote on her website: I have a request for all of you who are coming to the shows. We have purposefully chosen an intimate theatre setting rather than a large venue or stadium. It would mean a great deal to me if you would please refrain from taking photos or filming during the shows.
I very much want to have contact with you as an audience, not with iPhones, iPads or cameras. I know its a lot to ask but it would allow us to all share in the experience together.
With her love of theatrics and opulent costumes, Bushs keenness to stop fans uploading footage to YouTube could also be an attempt to keep the show a surprise for the thousands of fans who have bought tickets for the 22 dates she is playing.
Bush is not the first singer or musician to speak out against the effect of phones at concerts. The Who front man Roger Daltrey recently said it was weird that people did not have their mind on the show when they had gone to a performance and were concentrating on staring at the screen rather than the artist on stage.
He said: I feel sorry for them, I really feel sorry for them. Looking at life through a screen and not being in the moment totally  if youre doing that, youre 50% there, right? Its weird. I find it weird.
In 2013, Beyonc berated one her fans at a gig for filming. You cant even sing because youre too busy filming, Beyonc told him. You gotta seize this moment. Put that damn camera down!
The debate around phones at live events is not restricted to music. Recently, Dutch football fans at PSV Eindhoven protested against the introduction of wi-fi in their stadium, holding up banners with messages like No wi-fi. Support the team, You can sit at home, and Stand united, while Manchester United have also told fans to leave their large electronic devices at home.
Jarvis Cocker has also criticized fans with phones in the audience  he says they drive him insane at concerts, adding: It seems stupid to have something happening in front of you and look at it on a screen thats smaller than a cigarette packet.
Johnny Marr said in 2013 that it meant that fans missed out on the sensory experience of live music in their desperation to film the event for later.
To stand and just be looking at it through your phone is a completely wasted opportunity. You know, I dont mean to be unkind but I think you should put your phone down because youre just being an idiot, really. Just enjoy the gig, he said.
Even in the world of classical music, one of the worlds leading pianists surprised concertgoers in June 2013 when he stormed off stage because a fan was filming his performance on a smartphone. Krystian Zimerman returned moments later and said: The destruction of music because of YouTube is enormous.
But Sam Watt of Vyclone, a phone app that encourages audiences to film at concerts and then brings together the footage to create a crowd-sourced video of the event, said that filming at concerts enhanced the experience.
Fans filming is now part of the concert experience  that is a just a fact  so we take the footage that people are filming at concerts and then it comes back to them mixed together with everybody else who was filming. You end up with really fantastic content, he said.
Our thinking is that filming at concerts adds to the experience, rather than taking away from it and I think, if Kate Bush came round for a cup of tea, we could have a really interesting discussion about this, he added. Knowing that people are going to film and want those memories is really important. Youve got to embrace it.



