Intermediate 
After being told again that the beer she wanted would be too dark and too strong for you  have something sweeter, Rebecka Singerer was really annoyed.
No, I dont want a fruit beer. Women can drink whatever they want, she says.
Now Singerer, a childminder, has joined FemAle, a group of like-minded drinkers in Gothenburg, to make and sell Swedens  rst beer made by women.
We Can Do It, a bottled pale ale, has just gone on sale in stores across Sweden. Its label is similar to Rosie the Riveter, the creation of a US Second World War propaganda campaign that became a symbol of womens power at work.
The groups founder is Elin Carlsson, 25, who paints cars at the Volvo factory outside the city. We Can Do It is not a female beer but a beer brewed by women that anyone can drink, she says. Its nothing to do with feminism; its about equality  we wanted to show we can do it.
FemAle is up against decades of prejudice in the beer world. Carlsberg and other big brewers have spent millions in recent years trying to sell beer to women, attempting to appeal to what the companies believe women want. Carlsbergs Eve and Copenhagen beers, Fosters Radler and Coorss Animee were some of the lighter,  avoured and even bloat-resistant beers that were unsuccessful.
FemAles approach is different. They have women-only tastings that allow potential customers to experiment with  avours and styles of beer that they may not normally try. This education process is the way to get more girls into the beer world, the group says. Bring your mother, sister, girlfriend, aunt and grandmother so we all can learn more about beer.
The idea for FemAle came after the women kept seeing each other at beer festivals.
We Can Do It was the brainchild of Felicia Nordstro_m, a bar worker who says she was fed up with male beer snobs telling her: What do you know about beer, sweetie? She talked to FemAle, and they teamed up with Ocean, a local independent micro-brewery. One weekend they came up with the recipe and the next weekend they brewed 1,600 litres.
This is not a beer that is aimed at women  its our hoppiest brew, says Thomas Bingebo, the head brewer at Ocean. When the big breweries target women, it usually fails. This is something completely different.
The rstbottlesofWeCanDoItweresoldout almost before they were brewed. FemAle has already been approached by other breweries who want to brew new beers with them.
Women choose a glass of wine because they dont know what beer is all about; they dont know what to order, says Carlsson. We open up new worlds to them."
The women are part of a brewing explosion in Sweden, which is developing a passion for craft beers. The standard stor stark (large strong) lager is now almost extinct in Gothenburg, the women say, as pubs and bars replace the big brands with a choice of specialist beers.
All the girls are different  there is no typical woman beer-lover. Anyone can do it, says Emma Henriksson, 22, a group member who works in a garden equipment company.
Every pub wants to learn how to reach women, adds Singerer. And Elin has found the way. Its awesome. We feel so proud.


