Intermediate 
Race engineer A race engineer liaises between the driver and the mechanics.
Typical salary: New graduates start at 25,000 to 30,000 and quickly progress to junior engineer roles, earning more than 40,000 with just a few years experience. Senior race engineers earn 50,000 to 90,000.
What the job involves: A race engineer is the interpreter between the race-car mechanics and the driver, says race engineer Jamie Muir. The engineer takes feedback from the driver, analyses the data and makes decisions about the set-up needed for maximum performance, then passes this on to the mechanics.
Quali cations: A university degree, typically in automotive/mechanical engineering or motorsport technology. Hands-on experience is essential.
To succeed as a race engineer, you need ... to be able to deal with pressure.
Worst thing about the job: The long hours. Race engineers work 24/7, says Chris Aylett, CEO of the Motorsport Industry Association.
Ethical hacker Typical salary: A newly quali ed hacker can expect a minimum salary of 35,000 to 50,000. This rises to 60,000 to 90,000 at team-leader level.
What the job involves: A company will pay an ethical hacker to hack into its computer system to see how well it might resist a real attack.
Quali cations: You dont necessarily need a degree in computer science. The industry accepts individuals with a very wide range of academic quali cations and skills.
To succeed as an ethical hacker, you need ... a passion for technology and detail. You should also enjoy solving dif cult problems.
Worst thing about the job: When you are called in to test the security of a new customers network and you discover that they have already been hacked.
Bomb-disposal diver Typical salary: In the private sector, you can earn up to 100,000 working just two months out of every three.
What the job involves: Descending to the sea bed and searching for unexploded bombs, shells, grenades and landmines, then either safely recovering and collecting the weapons or securely disposing of them.
Quali cations: To dive offshore, you must have diving quali cations. To be able to dispose of the bombs safely, youll also need an explosive- disposal quali cation and years of experience.
To succeed as a bomb-disposal diver, you need ... to stay calm in stressful situations. You work alone under water, with zero visibility and, if you dont like living in small con ned spaces with lots of other people, forget it.
Worst thing about the job: Expect to be away from home at least six months of the year.
Social engineer Typical salary: Graduates start on 25,000 but salaries increase rapidly with quali cations and experience, rising to between 50,000 and 80,000, on average.
The job: Companies pay a social engineer to try to trick employees into giving them con dential information that allows the engineer to access sensitive company data or the companys computer network.
Quali cations: Typically, social engineers have a degree in IT, although an understanding of psychology is useful. 
To succeed as a social engineer, you need ... the con dence to lie convincingly and the ability to  t in almost anywhere without looking too out of place. You also need a strong sense of personal ethics and an understanding of the law.
Worst thing about the job: Other people may misunderstand your job: social engineers are not spies but most people think they are.
Power-line helicopter pilot Typical salary: 65,000
The job: To  y close to high-voltage power lines in a helicopter so that the lines can be inspected with a camera and any potential faults and issues can be identi ed by the power company.
Quali cations: A private-helicopter-pilot licence, a commercial pilots licence and around 2,000 hours of experience  ying at low levels.
To succeed as a power line helicopter pilot, you need ... a steady hand and a cool head. Typically, pilots must  y beside the power line, sometimes as little as 20 feet away and just 30 feet off the ground.
Worst thing about the job: There are no negatives, says helicopter pilot Robin Tutcher.
Private butler Typical salary: 60,000 to 90,000
The job: A private butler can be called on by his or her employer to do anything from wardrobe management to chauffeuring and pet care. Typical duties include managing other staff, serving at every meal, running errands, looking after guests, booking restaurants, house security, housekeeping, cooking and anything else the household needs.
Quali cations: You dont need any speci c quali cations but you can do a special course.
To succeed as a butler, you need ... to enjoy looking after other people.
Worst thing about the job: Long hours and an unpredictable work schedule mean its dif cult to have a family life. Butlers also suffer from isolation, cultural differences with their employer and having to work for people who arent always nice.
