Intermediate 
According to a recent report, the wealthiest people in India will become four times richer by 2018, with hundreds of thousands of new entrepreneurs and inheritors becoming multimillionaires. The survey, based on interviews with 150 wealthy individuals, comes at a time when there are signs of returning business confidence in the worlds biggest democracy.
Recent years have seen weak economic growth, rising prices of basic foods and a fall in the value of the Indian currency. But the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) won a landslide victory in May 2014 with its promise to improve the economy. Despite the economic slowdown, there are now nearly a sixth more Indians worth more than $3.75m than in 2013, the report says. Cities are mushrooming, the middle class population growing, opportunities have increased many times over and the political environment has improved greatly in recent months, says Murali Balaraman, a co-author.
Between them, Indias rich hold assets worth a trillion dollars, which is around a fifth of the total wealth in the country. By 2018, that total is likely to reach $4tn, the report says, making three times as many people multimillionaires.
A booming luxury market is serving the new rich. They really want to show or talk about their wealth in a really subtle way and buying luxury goods is a nice way to do it, Balaraman said. Abhay Gupta, the CEO of brand consultancy Luxury Connect, said the market for luxury goods and experiences would only get bigger. There is a huge aspirational class who look up to what the very wealthy are doing and then copy it, he said.
Cars are among the most popular items bought, the report says. Whereas, in 2009, locally made SUVs were shown off by the wealthy, now only foreign cars will impress people. Mercedes saw a 47% growth in sales in India in 2013. BMW has launched a new $200,000 model in Delhi.
Indias appalling infrastructure limits demand for luxury cars, however. Lamborghinis Chief Executive, Stephan Winkelmann, admitted, in 2013, that the traffic and roads in India are not so suitable for the $450,000 sports cars. In India, Lamborghini sells two models: the Gallardo and the Aventador, which has a top speed of 217mph. Winkelmann said Lamborghinis Indian customers were much younger than those in Europe, with a typical buyer being in his 30s. However, the most popular investments are still real estate  mainly within India  and jewellery.
Indias super-rich have often surprised people around the world with their spectacular spending. Mukesh Ambani, the countrys wealthiest man, has built the worlds most valuable home in Mumbai, the commercial capital. The 27-storey tower, complete with helicopter pads, indoor cinemas and a staff of more than 600, is worth $1bn.
The three-day wedding of the niece of Lakshmi Mittal, the UK-based steel tycoon who is worth $16bn, was reported to have cost $80m. Hundreds of guests were flown to Barcelona for the ceremony and party, which took place in a museum in the city.
But buyers of exclusive luxury goods are becoming more and more demanding, the report says. One buyer ordered nine cases of Japanese whisky costing over $750 a bottle for a wedding reception. The attraction of the imported whisky was that no one who attended the wedding would know how to find the same drink in India. Another big spender bought identical pairs of Louis Vuitton bags, then cut up half of them to make clothes that would match her accessories.
Even the traditional wedding is changing. Traditionally, presents such as silver plates, dried fruit or sweets are sent with wedding invitations. But, now, these presents are being replaced by gifts by top western designer brands. These days, its Rolex watches and Louis Vuitton bags, says Gupta.
Almost half the new multimillionaires live in smaller cities and a high proportion give large amounts to charity. Co-author Balaraman says that growth in the number of rich people would not result in social tensions because a wide gap in incomes and wealth is an accepted norm in India. People know that someone is rich and someone is poor and they carry on with their lives, he explains.

