Intermediate 
The UK prime minister, David Cameron, has declared a clear result in the Scottish independence referendum  Scotland voted by a 10.6-point margin against ending the 307-year- old union with England and Wales. The prime minister promised a devolution revolution in Great Britain, as he welcomed Scotlands decision to remain inside the UK. There can be no disputes, no reruns  we have heard the will of the Scottish people, he said in a statement.
Earlier, Scotlands  rst minister, Alex Salmond, remained de ant at a Scottish National Party rally in Edinburgh  he said he accepted Scotland had not, at this stage, decided to vote for independence. He said the referendum was a triumph for democratic politics and he would work with the government in London in the best interests of Scotland and the rest of the UK. We have touched sections of the community who have never before been touched by politics, he said.
The yes campaign won four big successes  it won 53% of the vote in Scotlands largest city, Glasgow, 57% in Dundee and 51% in North Lanarkshire. However, the no campaign was victorious in 28 authorities. It won easily in areas where it was expected to do well, including Edinburgh, Aberdeenshire and Borders, but also in areas that could have gone to the yes campaign, including the Western Isles. In the  nal count, the no camp won 2,001,926 votes (55.3%) and the yes camp won 1,617,989 votes (44.7%).
In his speech, Cameron made clear that there would be constitutional reforms, including in Scotland, but not until after the general election. He also said that Scottish measures would happen in tandem with changes in England. We have heard the voice of Scotland and, now, the millions of voices of England must be heard, he said.
Cameron added: The people of Scotland have spoken and it is a clear result. They have kept our country of four nations together and, like millions of other people, I am delighted. As I said during the campaign, it would have broken my heart to see our United Kingdom come to an end. And I know that feeling was shared by people not just across our country but around the world because of what we have achieved together in the past and what we can do together in the future. So, now, it is time for our United Kingdom to come together and to move forward. A vital part of that will be a balanced settlement, fair to people in Scotland and, importantly, to everyone in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as well.
Ed Miliband, the leader of the Labour Party, said the referendum was a vote from the Scottish people for change. We know our country needs to change. We will deliver stronger powers for a stronger Scottish parliament, a strong Scotland. But he said that would go beyond Scotland. We will also meet the desire for change across England, across Wales, across the whole of the United Kingdom.
Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister, said the referendum was not only a new chapter for Scotland within the UK but also wider constitutional reform across the union. He said a vote against independence was not a vote against change. We must now deliver on time and in full the radical package of newly devolved powers to Scotland, he added.
Yet that result raises the risk of further problems  MPs from Camerons Conservative Party are threatening to vote against the prime ministers promise to quickly increase the Scottish parliaments powers and protect its spending.
The UK Independence Party leader, Nigel Farage, said Camerons offer of more devolution for England did not go far enough. The English are 86% by population of this union. Theyve been left out of all of this for the last 18 years. We still have a situation where Scottish MPs can vote in the House of Commons on English-only issues. I think what most English people want is a fair settlement, he said. 
Cameron will try to calm tensions when he makes another statement on the result. The prime minister will explain how he will deliver further devolution to Scotland, including giving greater powers over tax and welfare to the Scottish Parliament in Edinburgh. The prime minister wants to move fast to show that the three main UK party leaders will meet the commitments they made during the referendum campaign.
For the no campaign, there was relief: a number of opinion polls in the  nal days of the campaign had said the vote was on a knife-edge. This brought Yes Scotland within touching distance of victory after a dramatic surge in support.


