Intermediate 
Glastonbury Festival is declaring war on the plastic water bottle as part of a long-term plan to become the worlds most environmentally friendly outdoor music event.
Festival organizers are targeting the disposable bottle, one of the most obvious symbols of the throwaway culture, that each year leaves the 900-acre festival site covered in plastic. An estimated one million plastic bottles are used during the festival.
Stainless-steel reusable bottles will be given to 2,000 road crew and band members. Thousands more will go on sale to festival-goers to stop them relying on plastic bottles. The 140,000 ticketholders are also being asked to bring reusable bottles that they can fill at 400 drinking-water taps across the site.
Lucy Smith, Glastonburys green issues organizer, said: We have amazing water quality in the UK but everyone is obsessed with drinking bottled water.
She said that, in 2015, Glastonbury also plans to replace all plastic glasses and cutlery with reusable items.
Environmentalists say that there is currently 150 million tonnes of plastic waste around the planet and oceans, poisoning ecosystems and killing wildlife.
Ultimately, festival organizers hope to make Glastonbury the worlds greenest greenfield festival. They want to be like Americas Burning Man festival in the Black Rock Desert of Nevada, which is a leave-no-trace event, where people have to take away all that they bring.
Glastonbury festival-goers are also being asked to travel to the site on public transport or to try car-sharing with friends. We want to be as sustainable as we can. We do everything we can, but the litter of 140,000 people is a challenge. We cant put bins everywhere, added Smith.
Plastic water bottles can take hundreds or even thousands of years to completely biodegrade. Their manufacture makes their negative ecological impact even worse. Millions of barrels of oil are used in the manufacture of plastic bottles and the transportation of mineral water across the planet produces even more carbon emissions.
Around 13 billion plastic water bottles are sold in the UK every year, but only one in five is recycled.
Smith said that, instead of buying bottled water, festival-goers should take advantage of the water on tap, which comes from huge underground reservoirs. The charity WaterAid will also set up water kiosks around the site, which will stock reusable bottles and cups and offer free refills.
Organizers say that almost half of all the rubbish left on site was recycled in 2013 and add that there will be 15,000 bins for recycling across the festival grounds in 2014.
Even though it is becoming more environmentally friendly, critics say that Glastonbury is becoming increasingly corporate. Iron Maidens Bruce Dickinson said he would never bring his band to Glastonbury Festival, which he called the most bourgeois thing on the planet.

