Intermediate 
They call him the Robin Hood of the banks, a man who took out many loans worth almost half a million euros with no intention of ever paying them back. Instead, Enric Duran gave the money to projects that created and promoted alternatives to capitalism.
After 14 months in hiding, Duran is unapologetic, even though his activities could put him in jail. Im proud of what I did, he said in an interview by Skype from a secret location.
From 2006 to 2008, Duran took out 68 commercial and personal loans from 39 banks in Spain. He gave the money to social activists, who used it to pay for speaking tours against capitalism and TV cameras for a media network. He said he saw that these social movements were building alternatives but that they didnt have enough money. Meanwhile, constant growth was creating a system that created money out of nothing.
The loans he swindled from banks were his way of regulating and denouncing this situation, he said. He started slowly. I  lled out a few credit applications with my real details. They said no, but I just wanted to understand what they were asking for.
From there, the former table-tennis coach began to set up a confusing web of accounts, payments and transfers. I was learning constantly. By the summer of 2007, he had discovered how to make the system work  he applied for loans under the name of a false television production company. Then, I managed to get a lot. 492,000, to be exact.
Duran was arrested in Spain in 2009, on charges brought against him by six of the 39 banks that had lent him money. He spent two months in prison before being let out on 50,000 bail. In February 2013, threatened with up to eight years in prison, he decided to  ee rather than stand trial because, he said, he doesnt recognize the authority of the judicial system.
His actions, he said, were an important part of a worldwide debate on the economic crisis. The timing pushed the anti-capitalist movement into the light, just as many Spaniards were looking for alternatives to a system that has caused chaos in their lives. 
In todays Spain, the anti-capitalist movement, and groups such as the Indignados, are supported by thousands of Spaniards.
Duran is now widening his focus to include Spains justice system, by promoting restorative justice. The people in Spain who believe that banks dont work, they think that I dont owe anything. Ive already done my work, he said. But there is a part of a population that is not in agreement with us and I think I should respond to that.
In his case, he said, he could offer banks the insight he got from years of obtaining bank loans fraudulently. He could share his thoughts on which best practices work and the bad ones that dont, he suggested, for the general population and for bank workers.
