Intermediate 
JMW Turner, one of Britains greatest painters, will appear on the new 20 note, after a nationwide vote.
It will be the first time an artist has appeared on a British banknote, after the governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, asked the public to choose a deceased cultural figure they felt deserved to be on the banknote.
Turner, who is famous for his dramatic seascapes, beat off competition from 590 painters, sculptors, fashion designers, photographers, film-makers and actors put forward by 30,000 members of the public.
The list included Alfred Hitchcock, Alexander McQueen, Derek Jarman, Laura Ashley, William Morris and Vanessa Bell. This list was narrowed down to a final choice of five by a panel of artists, critics and historians.
The final five  Barbara Hepworth, Charlie Chaplin, Josiah Wedgwood, William Hogarth and Turner  were chosen because of their unquestioned contribution to both the visual arts and British society, as well as their enduring influence.
The announcement of the new banknote was made at the Turner Contemporary gallery in Margate. The announcement was made jointly by Carney and the artist Tracey Emin, who grew up in the town.
Carney said it had been so important to get this right and have a proper process that involved the public. He added that banknotes are not only a practical necessity  they can be a piece of art in everyones pocket.
The fact that we will have Turner on the 20 note shows that the British people are a nation of people who appreciate creativity and appreciate the arts, said Emin.
The note will show Turners 1799 self-portrait, as well as one of his most famous works, The Fighting Temeraire, the ship that played an important role in Nelsons victory at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805.
The note will also contain a quote from the artist  light is therefore colour  as well as his signature. The signature is from his will, in which he left many of his paintings to the nation.
Historical figures were first shown on banknotes in 1970. Turner joins Winston Churchill and Jane Austen as the significant figures who will feature on the new polymer notes  a plastic-type material  Churchill on the 5 and Austen on the 10 note. The new 20 note will be available by 2020.
Turner was born in 1775 in London, the son of a barber, and he entered the Royal Academy Schools at the age of 14. In 1786, when he was sent to Margate, his love of painting and drawing the north-east Kent coast began. He returned to that coast throughout his life and it was where he painted some of his most dramatic oils and watercolours. He described its skies as the loveliest in all Europe.
Turner was a very prolific artist  he produced more than 550 oil paintings and 2,000 watercolours in his lifetime. His life was also the subject of a film, in 2014, by Mike Leigh, with Timothy Spall as the artist.
Victoria Pomery, the director of Turner Contemporary, said: The decision to celebrate JMW Turner, one of the greatest technical pioneers in the history of British art, is extraordinary. It has proven that Turner is the nations favourite artist.




