Intermediate 
From all across Rwanda, and even parts of neighbouring Burundi, people are coming to the southern town of Butare to a little shop called Inzozi Nziza (Sweet Dreams). They come for a taste of the unknown, something most have never tasted before  sweet, cold ice cream.
Here, at the central African countrys  rst ice- cream parlour, customers can buy scoops in sweet cream, passion fruit, strawberry and pineapple  avours. Toppings include fresh fruit, honey, chocolate chips and granola. Black tea and coffee are also on sale.
The shop, which has ice cream, coffee, dreams written on its signs, is taking advantage of local curiosity about the dessert  and changing lives in the process, says Inzozi Nzizas manager, Louise Ingabire.
Ice cream is important, she says between mouthfuls of a honey- avoured offering. Some Rwandans like ice cream, but its a new thing. We still have some work to do, to tell others that theyll enjoy it.
The shop can certainly make dreams come true. I didnt have a job before: I just stayed at home. Now, I have a vision for the future. I am making money and I can give some of it to my family, says the 27-year-old.
Butare, which has 89,600 residents and is located 135km south of the capital, Kigali, is the home of the National University of Rwanda. Inzozi Nziza has become a meeting place for tired students looking to treat themselves to something cool and different.
Its something uniting people here, Kalisa Migendo, a 24-year-old agriculture student, says. If you need to go out and talk to a friend, a girl or a boy, you come to Inzozi Nziza for an ice cream.
Most of the ingredients are from local sources and the milk comes from nearby Nyanza. The vanilla beans and cocoa are imported.
Inzozi Nziza was opened by the theatre director Odile Gakire Katese. She met Alexis Miesen and Jennie Dundas, co-founders of Blue Marble Ice Cream in Brooklyn, New York, and formed a partnership to open the shop in 2010.
An ice-cream shop, Katese said, might help to put the human pieces back together by rebuilding spirits, hopes and family traditions, Miesen says.
At the start, Miesen and Dundas owned the shop in partnership with its staff and had shares in the business, which is a cooperative and non-pro t. After 18 months, they transferred their shares to the women, who had by then proved they could run the business.
Ice cream is new to Rwanda. Making the business successful requires a lot of skills and changing peoples way of thinking because selling and eating ice cream is not part of Rwandan culture.
The Butare shop employs nine women, who spend their spare time practising with Ingoma Nshya, Rwandas  rst and only female drumming group, which was established by Katese ten years ago.
The musicians are Hutu and Tutsi women. Some are survivors of the 1994 genocide, during which almost a million Tutsis and Hutus were killed. Some members of Ingoma Nshya are widows, some orphans.
Historically, says Ingabire, Rwandan women were forbidden to drum and many people considered the drums too heavy for women to carry. But its something which brings unity.
Ingabires father, two siblings and many cousins were killed in the genocide. When Im drumming, it gives me power because were still alive and survivors, she says.
The ice-cream parlour is in a documentary by  lm-makers Rob and Lisa Fruchtman. Sweet Dreams, which tells the story of how the women have made a promising post-genocide future, also includes the female drummers.
The  lm has been shown in more than a dozen countries, including the US, UK and several African states. We feel the  lm is about resilience, hope, bravery, resourcefulness and the ability to change the course of your own life, says Lisa Fruchtman.


