It is no secret that millennials use technology a lot.
More than eight in ten say they sleep with a mobile phone by their bed, almost two thirds admit they text while driving, one in five has posted a video of themselves online and three quarters have created a profile on a social networking site. But there is a small percentage of millennials who don’t use social media at all. Here are four of them.
Celan Beausoleil, 31, Oakland, California
Beausoleil is a social worker and has had an “on and off” relationship with Facebook. She last deactivated her account in December 2015 because she found the amount of personal information shared by others “too heavy” to deal with in addition to her work demands.
“In my job, I spend a lot of time listening to people’s lives all day, every day and it started to feel so overwhelming to go on social media and see every single detail of everybody’s lives, including people that I don’t really have a relationship with,” she said.
“I’m involved a lot with people in my work life and sometimes it felt like it was too heavy to do in my personal life also.”
But Beausoleil loves the way social media connects the world in a truly unique way. “One thing I really liked about Facebook was that I could sit for hours and click on a friend and then click on one of their friends and one of their friends and one of their friends and end up on someone’s Facebook page from the other side of the world,” she said. “I used to do that all the time.”
Jason Mathias, 26, Baltimore, Maryland
“One day, I realized: I’m spending so much time doing this. These little seconds add up. I wonder what it would be like if I didn’t spend these seconds here and spent them doing something else. What if I was doing other things with these seconds? What would they become? Would I enjoy it?”
Mathias had Facebook and Twitter accounts for years before deleting them both in November 2012.
But he “quickly forgot that Facebook existed” after his impromptu decision to end his social media presence. He can still appreciate the benefits that come with having social media accounts, for example how easy it is to organize large events online. He now relies on friends for party invites.
But now he loves his extra free time. He spends his lift rides and spare moments at work reading news articles and books. And with no friends’ accounts to follow online, he has to “pick up the phone and call them”, something he’s come to enjoy.
Lauren Raskauskas, 22, Naples, Florida
Raskauskas describes herself as a “pretty private” person. So social media is not that appealing to her.
“My privacy is important to me and I have concerns about giving out my data,” she said. She recently deleted her Twitter account and deactivated her Facebook account two years ago when she realized that she “didn’t like everyone knowing what I was doing”. But she can see the positive sides of social media. When a friend of hers that she’d lost track of moved to Naples for a month, Raskauskas didn’t even realize she was there until after she’d left, which “was a bummer”.
But in the end, her privacy concerns outweighed any benefits social media could give her and she saw a definite upside when she went through a recent break-up. The last time a relationship of hers ended and she was online, it was not pleasant. “One time, I broke up with somebody while I was on Facebook and I was like ‘Oh my gosh, should I change my profile photo? Should I change my status?’ And, this time, I don’t have to worry about any of that,” she said.
Hariharan Rajagopalan, 18, Boston,Massachusetts
Rajagopalan, a student at Boston College, doesn’t see any problem with not using social media. He claims that he “hasn’t seen any effect at this point”.
Even though classmates post about parties and events on Facebook, they make sure to send him a text message, too, he said.
The only time Rajagopalan used social media was when it was unavoidable: it was the only way to reach his new roommate at college. Before starting his first year at college, he signed up for his first, and only, social media account. He joined Facebook in order to contact his future roommate and talk about their plans for that year. 
He still has the account but he admits: “I don’t use it.
I don’t check it or anything like that.” He has avoided other social media accounts but, as a sports fan, he acknowledged that Twitter “is where most of the news first appears”. But he refused to get an account because, he says, “I don’t really need one to read tweets”.
