Scarlett Johansson is suing a French novelist for €50,000. She says that his work of fiction makes fraudulent claims about her personal life.
La premiere chose qu’on regarde (The First Thing We Look At) by Grégoire Delacourt tells the story of a French model who looks so similar to the American actor that the book’s lead male character thinks it is Johansson herself. In the novel, the model’s looks mean that men see her only as a sex object, while women are jealous of her. She has a series of adventures as Johansson and, in the end, dies in a car crash.
Johansson does not feel flattered by the bestselling book. Her lawyer, Vincent Toledano, told Le Figaro that Delacourt’s novel illegally used Ms Johansson’s name, her reputation and her image. He said the novel contains “defamatory claims about her private life.” He has now gone to court to try to stop the book being translated or adapted for cinema.
Delacourt tried to explain that he chose to mention Johansson because she is “the archetype of beauty today.” He said: “I wrote a work of fiction. My character is not Scarlett Johansson.”
On French radio, the author recently said the legal action was “rather sad”. He said: “It freaks me out to think that when you talk of a character in a novel, judges can get involved.”
Delacourt is one of France’s best-loved authors; his previous novel, My List of Desires, was translated into 47 languages and is now being adapted into a film. But he said he was “speechless” when he found out Johansson was suing him.
“I thought she’d get in contact to ask me to go for a coffee with her. I didn’t write a novel about a celebrity,” he said. “I wrote a real love story about feminine beauty, especially interior beauty.
“If an author can no longer mention the things that surround us – a brand of beer, a monument, an actor – it’s going to be complicated to produce fiction.
“I’m not sure she’s even read the novel because it hasn’t been translated yet.”
Emmanuelle Allibert, spokeswoman for publisher JC Lattès, said taking legal action was “crazy”. “We have never known anything like it. It is all the more surprising because the novel is not even about Scarlett Johansson. It is about a woman who is Scarlett Johansson’s double.”
Ironically, the author’s legal situation would be far easier if he had published the book in Johansson’s home country, rather than France. Lloyd Jassin, a New York lawyer, said that the case would most likely not go to court in the United States because the book would be protected by the First Amendment.
He said that, if there’s significance and literary merit to using her name in the book, the First Amendment would protect the author’s right to do so. However, in France, the legal position is more complicated and personality rights are taken “much more seriously,” Jassin says.
“I thought she might send me flowers as the book was a declaration of love for her, but she didn’t understand,” Delacourt said.