Elementary
The Duchess of Cambridge gave birth to a son on Monday, 22 July. The baby will be king after his grandfather and father.
Kensington Palace announced at 8.30pm that the baby was born at 4.24pm at St Marys Hospital, Paddington, West London. We could not be happier, the Duke of Cambridge said.
In a statement, Kensington Palace said: Her Royal Highness the Duchess of Cambridge was safely delivered of a son at 4.24pm. The baby weighs 8lbs 6oz. The Duke of Cambridge was present for the birth.
The Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh, the Prince of Wales, the Duchess of Cornwall, Prince Harry and members of both families were delighted with the news that Her Royal Highness and her child were both doing well.
William telephoned his family to tell them the good news, speaking to the Queen, his father Charles and younger brother Prince Harry.
The birth of the baby prince means the monarchy has three generations of heirs to the throne for the first time since 1894.
Prince Charles said: Both my wife and I are overjoyed at the arrival of my first grandchild. It is an incredibly special moment for William and Catherine and we are so thrilled for them on the birth of their baby boy.
Grandparenthood is a unique moment in anyones life, as countless kind people have told me in recent months, so I am enormously proud and happy to be a grandfather for the first time and we are eagerly looking forward to seeing the baby in the near future.
The newest royal will be called HRH Prince George* of Cambridge.
Following tradition, a formal notice was put on an easel  the same easel that was used to announce Prince Williams birth in 1982  in front of Buckingham Palace just before 9pm. Within an hour, there were thousands of people outside the palace who wanted to share in the historic moment.
New Yorker, Sharon Surloff, was delighted with her phone picture of the royal bulletin. She, her niece and her mother had squeezed through crowds to take a photograph of the easel.
The police were just saying to everyone: OK, 20 seconds and then the next person. But its just great to be here.
The palace announced the birth in a press release. Minutes later, as crowds of people outside cheered, Its a boy, the formal medical bulletin was taken from the hospital to Buckingham Palace.
Speaking outside 10 Downing Street, British Prime Minister, David Cameron said: It is wonderful news from St Marys, Paddington, and I am sure that, right across the country, and, indeed, right across the Commonwealth, people are celebrating and wishing the royal couple well.
It is an important moment in the life of our nation but, above all, it is a wonderful moment for a warm and loving couple who have got a brand new baby boy. It has been a remarkable few years for our royal family  a royal wedding, that extraordinary and magnificent jubilee and now this royal birth.
Congratulations came from the White House, too, from Barack Obama and his wife. The president said: Michelle and I are so pleased to congratulate the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge on the joyous occasion of the birth of their first child. We wish them all the happiness and blessings parenthood brings.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Most Rev Justin Welby, tweeted: Delighted for the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge. May God bless them all with love, health and happiness, he said.
The Labour leader, Ed Miliband, said: Many congratulations to the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge. I wish them and their son all happiness and good health.


