Elementary
Women have traditionally had a minor role in professional football but this may be changing. France has just employed its first female professional team manager. It did not matter that it was a second-division club. It did not matter if it was, as some people suggested, just a publicity stunt for a minor team, Clermont Foot 63. Clermont is 14th out of the 20 teams in its league at the moment.
What mattered was that they gave Helena Costa the top job. This has made football history because she is the first female manager in the top two divisions of any professional European league. As a woman, its made me happy, said Vronique Soulier, president of the clubs supporters association. When I first heard the news, I was surprised, but, then, we all agreed that its good news. We all agree that a woman at the head of a group of men is no bad thing.
The new manager of Clermont Foot 63 was born in Alhandra, Portugal and has a masters degree in sports science. She is also a UEFA-licensed coach. She previously coached Benficas male youth teams, the Qatar womens team and, more recently, the Iranian womens national team.
The president of Clermont Foot 63, Claude Michy, gave Costa, 36, a two-year contract. Michy is very good at keeping his club in the news. In 2013, he told everyone the team had signed Messi. They had. Not the Argentinian and Barcelona striker Lionel Messi, but Junior Messi Enguene, a 20-year-old midfielder from Cameroon.
Carolina Morace, an Italian who was the only previous woman coach of a mens professional team, said: I dont know Helena, but, if she has been hired by a team, then it means that she knows how to do her job. I hope that, one day, this can become normal. Morace played for Italy in 153 internationals. In 1999, she became coach of the mens team Viterbese. But, after only two games, she resigned from the job because of a disagreement with the clubs owner. She added: I see too many men, even in the womens game, who do not have the same expertise as women but are working. And the women are not working.
Raymond Domenech, former manager of the French national team, said: Women know how to play football and how to manage and are good at doing it. Why shouldnt they manage mens teams? The opposite happens and doesnt cause any problems. Its a natural choice and reflects our society in which women are equal to men. I say well done to President Michy. I told myself that, if I took control of a club again, Id hire a woman as my number two. Michy did it first.
Clermont Foot 63 says that Costas becoming the teams manager will allow the club to enter a new era. On the club supporters website, reaction to Costas becoming the manager was mixed. In my opinion, its just a publicity stunt to get people talking about the club. I find it hard to believe shell be able to get the players respect, above all when shes the same age as the oldest, wrote one fan. Her CV isnt bad, but now the question is: will she be good enough? added another. A third wrote: I wish her welcome and success but I think itll be hard for her to do well as a woman in such a macho business.
But Soulier was hopeful: Hopefully, with the new manager, the club can find the motivation they dont have at the moment, she said. The boys in the team can be difficult to manage. With a woman in control, maybe they will be less demanding.
If we believe Costas reputation, she will be the person making the demands. After doing work experience at Chelsea during Jos Mourinhos first time as manager of the club between 2004 and 2007, people described her as Mourinho in a skirt. Costas comment on that description was: Like Mourinho, I always want to win. In that way, yes, Im happy to be compared with him.


