Elementary
Race engineer A race engineer takes information from the driver and gives it to the mechanics.
Typical salary: You start at 25,000 and very soon earn more than 40,000 with just a few years experience. Senior race engineers earn 50,000 to 90,000.
What the job involves: A race engineer is the interpreter between the race-car mechanics and the driver, says race engineer Jamie Muir. The engineer takes feedback from the driver, analyses the data and gives this to the mechanics.
Quali cations: A university degree, usually in automotive/mechanical engineering or motorsport technology. Hands-on experience is essential.
To succeed as a race engineer, you need ... to be able to work under pressure.
Worst thing about the job: The long hours. Race engineers work 24/7, says Chris Aylett, CEO of the Motorsport Industry Association.
Ethical hacker Typical salary: A newly quali ed hacker will usually have a minimum salary of 35,000 to 50,000. This rises to 60,000 to 90,000 when they become team leader.
What the job involves: A company pays an ethical hacker to hack into its computer system to see how well it might  ght a real attack. 
Quali cations: You dont need a degree in computer science. The industry accepts people with a very wide range of quali cations and skills.
To succeed as an ethical hacker, you need ... a passion for technology and detail. You should also enjoy solving dif cult problems.
Worst thing about the job: When you are testing the security of a new customers network and you  nd that they have already been hacked.
Bomb-disposal diver Typical salary: In the private sector, you can earn up to 100,000 working just two months out of every three.
What the job involves: You descend to the sea bed and look for unexploded bombs and mines. Then, you safely collect the weapons or safely dispose of them.
Quali cations: To dive offshore, you must have diving quali cations. To be able to dispose of the bombs safely, youll also need a special quali cation and years of experience.
To succeed as a bomb-disposal diver, you need ... to be calm in stressful situations. You work alone under water, with zero visibility and, if you dont like living in small spaces with lots of other people, this job is not for you.
Worst thing about the job: You will be away from home for at least six months of the year.
Social engineer Typical salary: Graduates start on 25,000. Your salary will rise to between 50,000 and 80,000.
The job: Companies pay a social engineer to try to trick their employees and make them give the engineer secret information.
Quali cations: Usually, social engineers have a degree in IT but an understanding of psychology is also useful.
To succeed as a social engineer, you need ... to be a good liar. You also need to have strong personal ethics and to understand the law.
Worst thing about the job: Other people may misunderstand your job: social engineers are not spies but most people think they are.
Power-line helicopter pilot Typical salary: 65,000
The job: To  y close to power lines in a helicopter so that someone can check the lines with a camera.
Quali cations: A private-helicopter-pilot licence, a commercial pilots licence and around 2,000 hours of experience  ying at low levels.
To succeed as a power-line helicopter pilot, you need ... a steady hand and to stay calm in dif cult situations. Pilots often have to  y next to the power line, sometimes as little as 20 feet away and just 30 feet off the ground.
Worst thing about the job: There are no negatives, says helicopter pilot Robin Tutcher.
Private butler Typical salary: 60,000 to 90,000
The job: An employer can ask a private butler to do anything from managing other staff, serving at every meal, running errands and looking after guests to booking restaurants, house security, housekeeping and cooking.
Quali cations: You dont need any quali cations but you can do a special course.
To succeed as a butler, you need ... to enjoy looking after other people.
Worst thing about the job: Long hours and an unpredictable work schedule mean its dif cult to have a family life.
