Elementary
In summer, in the Arctic regions of Canada, the sun shines for more than 20 hours a day. Some people enjoy this after the constant darkness of winter. But, for the small Muslim community of Iqaluit, life in the land of the midnight sun is a real challenge during the month of Ramadan, when Muslims fast from sunrise to sunset.
I havent fainted once, said 29-year-old Abdul Karim, one of only a few Muslims in the area who has carefully timed his Ramadan fast to the Arctic sun. This year, that means he eats at about 1.30am before the sun rises and breaks his fast at about 11pm when the sun sets. I would only stop if it hurt my health, Karim said.
Most Muslims in Iqaluit follow the timetable that Muslims in Ottawa, about 1,300 miles south, follow. This follows the advice of Muslim scholars who have said Muslims in the far north should observe Ramadan using the timetable of Mecca or the nearest Muslim city. They still have to fast for around 18 hours a day, said Atif Jilani, who moved to Iqaluit from Toronto. The days are long, but we can do it.
Its a similar situation in all of Canadas most northern mosques during Ramadan, where Muslims have to live with very long or very short days. In recent years, much of the community has chosen to follow the Ramadan timetable of Edmonton, in Alberta. Some follow the timetable of Mecca, for example Awan, a father of two young children, including a 12-year-old who recently started fasting. He hopes that the easier timetable will encourage his son  it means about 15 hours of fasting, not 18 hours like in Edmonton. If I fast Edmonton times, my son might say, Papa, you are really insane. What are you doing? he said.
For the 100 Muslims in Inuvik, a small town 125 miles north of the Arctic Circle, it is impossible to follow the local movements of the sun. They also follow Edmontons timetable. We currently have 24 hours a day of sun, said Ahmad Alkhalaf. Theres no sunrise or sunset. People already followed the Edmonton timetable in 2001 when he moved from Toronto to the small northern town of 3,500 people. My first Ramadan here was in December. Theres no sun at that time; its dark all day and night. So we used Edmonton time.
Sometimes, it can be difficult to follow the clock and not the sun, Alkhalaf said. We should break our fast when its dusk but we eat when the sun is up. Its not usual to have iftar [the meal that breaks the fast] when the sun is up, he said.
In Inuvik, where most of the population is Inuit, the Muslim community has tried to find a balance between Ramadan and the local culture and traditions. The iftar meal includes curries and also local meat such as reindeer. We make a soup or curry, but we dont use beef, we use reindeer.
In Iqaluit, this Ramadan has been one of the most difficult of recent years because it includes some of the longest days of the year. Its particularly true for people like Karim who have followed the local sunrise and sunset carefully. But, it will be easier for him to fast in future years, he says, thanks to the lunar calendar. Ramadan will then fall during winter and, in Iqaluit, the sun will rise and set within a few hours each day. Ill follow those hours, too, he said with a laugh. Oh yes!




