“Unless we win, it doesn’t mean a damn thing,” said billionaire Donald Trump, the man who wants to be the Republican presidential nominee, at a campaign rally in South Carolina. He said this despite finishing his fourth month in a row at the top of the opinion polls. “I want to pick my date for the election. I want it next Tuesday,” he confided to the crowd of 11,000 people. He has a lot of grassroots support, which he needs to continue until March 2016 for him to win the nomination to be the presidential candidate in November’s general election.
Trump is not the only one beginning to think it possible that his surprising campaign can go the distance, particularly because recent controversy only seems to have confirmed his lead over his rivals. Usually, any one of these outbursts would have destroyed a politician by now.
First, he outraged prisoners of war by doubting the heroism of Vietnam veteran John McCain because he allowed himself to be captured. Then, there was the first television debate, where he insulted Fox News moderator, Megyn Kelly, because she asked him difficult questions.
It seems that making prisoners of war, Fox News and women angry was not enough. Trump has also insulted Mexican immigrants to the US, claimed that a Black Lives Matter protester who was violently thrown out of a rally deserved to be “roughed up”, appeared to laugh at a New York Times journalist for his disability and falsely accused Muslim Americans of supporting the 9/11 attackers.
Trump has complained that many of these incidents were exaggerated by the political media, 70% of whom, he says, are “scum”. But, he has refused to retract any of the comments.
Some rivals still hope that, eventually, even Trump’s supporters will get tired of his attacks on minorities. One poll shows his support among Republicans has reduced by 12 points – although, at 31%, he is still in the lead.
“He is an egomaniac; he’s a narcissist. He’s not a conservative, he’s not a liberal – he believes in himself,” former presidential rival, Bobby Jindal, told the Guardian, before he left the race.
But, there is more to Trump than attentiongrabbing outrage. As he is happy to tell supporters, the three things that he is most against – immigration reform, free-trade deals and Barack Obama’s national security policy – have become perhaps the most important issues of the election.
His policies for deporting every undocumented immigrant in the US and demanding that Mexico pays for a border wall – “A real wall. A very tall wall, taller than that ceiling.” – might sound unrealistic but they have destroyed the campaign hopes of Jeb Bush, who favours immigration reform.
So what can stop Trump? One reason for hope among opponents is the strong evidence that polls this far away from election day can be incorrect, simply because most people have not made up their minds how to vote yet. Among Americans who say they are Republicans, current polls suggest he has 25-30% of the vote.
In the political battle for hearts and minds, converting Trump’s passionate supporters will be hard. It is hard to imagine anyone being a better ‘Trump’ than Trump.
This scenario can be best understood by looking at responses to the question: “Which candidates would you definitely not support for the Republican nomination for president?” While 20-30% of voters say they would support Trump, another 20-30% say they definitely would not.
Steve Deace, an Iowa conservative, said that Trump’s behaviour is “both a good and a bad thing. On the one hand, it produces loyal fans that are attracted to his personality. On the other hand, it limits his ability to grow beyond that.”
Top Republican pollster, Frank Luntz, believes Trump speaks for voters who, for the first time, feel as if they have a mouthpiece and like the fact that they feel like they are heard. He says, “Trump says what they’re thinking and, the more outrageous he is, the more they agree with him. He’s saying what no politician would say and that’s another reason they like him.”
That is certainly the feeling among ordinary supporters who have attended his increasingly packed campaign events recently. “I like the way he speaks,” says Sandra Murray of Dubuque, Iowa. “This country is a big mess and, honestly, he could be the man to help us.”
Other supporters offer a simpler explanation. “He’s not afraid of anybody or anything. That’s pretty cool.”